# **SHROOM-Visions 2026 - FAQ**

## TASK

**Q: What is this year’s hallucination detection task?**  
A: The SHROOM-Visions 2026 shared task challenges participants to predict the span(s) of text in LLM outputs that correspond to hallucinations. 
We're building up on Mu-SHROOM in two ways: 
1. we're now looking at large vision-and-language models (LVLMs);
2. we're asking for some form of classification as to what type of hallucination each detected span corresponds to, which can be one of the following:
  1. `invention`, when the LVLM's response refers to an entity, object, property, or event that is not present in the image at all;
  2. `mischaracterization`, when the response refers to something that is present in the image but describes it incorrectly;
  3. `OCR`, when the response misreads some text displayed in the image
  4. `miscounting`, when the response expresses an incorrect quantity of visible items.
  5. `other`, as a catch-all for other hallucinations not captured in any of the four categories above.

Outputs are provided in four languages. 
To fulfill the task, we provide labeled training sets; the unlabeled test data is already available. 
All the data can be downloaded from [this link](https://a3s.fi/mickusti-2007780-pub/shroom-visions-data.zip) during the competition.

**Q: What resources can be used to participate in the task?**  
A: You are free to use any resources at hand. We encourage creative solutions. 
We also strongly encourage using open (non-commercial) systems that can help enhance the state-of-the-art for the whole community.

**Q: Do we need to participate in all of the four available languages?**  
A: No. You can participate in a single language or as many as you wish. Each language will have its own leaderboard.

**Q: Could the approach to one language be (somehow) combined with the approach to another language?**  
A: That is up to you. In general, we would invite creative approaches to solve the task.

**Q: How many submissions can I make?**
A: We do not put a cap on the number of submissions per team. 
We don't want to penalize teams based on poor hyperparameter explorations. 
We will automatically select your best submissions for rankings.
We do encourage you to fill in the metadata form for each submission carefully, as we rely on it to write our overviews of the shared task.

## DATA

**Q: Why do you not use IoU in this iteration?**  
A: We felt that Mu-SHROOM allowed us to explore the relationship between hard and soft labels with some amount of depth already.
This time, we're trying to focus on the disparity between labeled and unlabeled span detection.
To avoid mutliplying metrics and to ensure that leaderboards remain somewhat easy to read, we focused on the correlation metric from Mu-SHROOM (to better handle the multiple annotations we have per datapoint), with some minor adapations.

**Q: Do all the data entries contain hallucinations?**  
A: The data contains some instances where no hallucinations happen. 
More details to come in the post-evaluation phase as to how the dataset was constructed.

**Q: How many annotators participated in the annotation process?**  
A: 3 persons annotated each datapoint. In a handful of cases, we had 4 annotators on the same datapoint.

**Q: Will you provide information on which annotator made each annotation?**  
A: We plan to eventually release anonymized data for the train set indicating which annotations were made by each annotator. 
We anticipate that this will enhance transparency and facilitate detailed analysis of the annotation process, but also serve as a valuable resource for examining annotator consistency, inter-annotator agreement and disagreement, and other relevant factors.

**Q: What were the annotation guidelines for the annotated datasets?**  
A: We will release the full annotations guidelines document in the post-evaluation phase. They roughly read as:
- Carefully read the answer text.
- Highlight each span of text in the answer text that is not supported by the provided context (i.e., contains an overgeneration or hallucination), mark what type of hallucination this is out of the five options listed above.
- Your annotations should include only the minimum number of characters in the text that should be edited/deleted to provide a correct answer.
- You are encouraged to annotate conservatively. This is not a strict guideline, and you should rely on your best judgments.
- If the answer text does not contain a hallucination, write “NO HALLUCINATION” in the comment box.
- Ensure that you double-check your annotations. You can edit or delete previous annotations.

**Q: How do the annotators decide where a hallucination span starts and where it ends?**  
A: The annotators were instructed to select the minimal span so that without it, the output would not contain hallucinations. 
In other words, if the selected span were omitted, the hallucination would be removed.

**Q: Is the annotation performed in stages? (e.g., (1) there is a hallucination; (2) which part signals it?)**  
A: No. It was done in a single stage.

**Q: Could there be discontinuous portions of a hallucination?**  
A: Yes, there are discontinuous spans in the annotated data.

**Q: Were the prompts for different languages on the same topics?**  
A: There is a (partial) overlap in the prompts used across languages.

## MODELLING & EVALUATION

**Q: What is the expected output format with the provided data?**  
A: You need to submit a JSONL, similar to the input data. 
To make sure things flow smoothly, we will release a format checking script. 
In more detail: the test files have the same structure as the validation files but without the `labels` key. 
Participants will be expected to fill in this missing key.

**Q: How are the predicted spans of hallucination going to be evaluated?**  
A: We use the Spearman correlation between predicted and reference (soft) spans. The unlabeled (`cor`) metric is very simila to what we had in Mu-SHROOM: we discard label type information and merge spans before computing a simple spearman on character-level probability scores.
For the label-sensitive metric, we first compute this Spearman correlation separately for each hallucination type in the union of predicted and reference types, and then macro-average these label-type specific scores.
We will release a scorer script for you to examine shortly.

## GENERAL

**Q: Is there something we need to know or particularly pay attention to regarding submission and the submission platform?**  
A: Some general recommendations:
- Follow the deadlines; we cannot make exceptions after the deadline.
- Register to the platform well in advance.
- Try not to make your submissions 5 min before the deadline.
- Follow the discussion on our Google group mailing list or the shared task Slack. We are sure you can profit from other people’s questions.

**Q: Can I change the name of my team after registering on the submission website?**  
A: Yes, we can manually update that information. Do note that this is an overhead on our side, and we prefer not to do so if possible. 
Please reach out to Timothee Mickus directly for that (preferably through a slack DM).
